Docs: Fixed Grafana Fundamentals tutorial to match updated UI (#73168)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/tutorials/grafana-fundamentals/index.md

The first thing you see is the Home dashboard, which helps you get started.

To the top corner in the far left you can see the _sidebar_ hamburger, selecting it will provide a set of quick access icons for navigating Grafana.

## Add a metrics data source

The sample application exposes metrics which are stored in [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), a popular time series database (TSDB).

To be able to visualize the metrics from Prometheus, you first need to add it as a data source in Grafana.

> 1. In the sidebar, hover over the **Administration** (gear) icon, and then click **Data sources**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the sidebar, click **Connections** and then **Data sources**.
```

1. Click **Add data source**.
1. In the list of data sources, click **Prometheus**.
1. In the URL box, enter **http\://prometheus:9090**.

> 1. Scroll to the bottom and click **Save & test**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Scroll to the bottom of the page and click **Save & test**.
```

> 1. In the sidebar, click the **Explore** (compass) icon. The Prometheus data source that you added will already be selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the menu icon and, in the sidebar, click **Explore**. The Prometheus data source that you added will already be selected.
```

> 1. In the **Query editor**, where it says _Enter a PromQL query…_, enter `tns_request_duration_seconds_count` and then press Shift + Enter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Confirm that you're in code mode by checking the **Builder/Code** toggle at the top right corner of the query panel. 
1. In the **Query editor**, where it says _Enter a PromQL query…_, enter `tns_request_duration_seconds_count` and then press Shift + Enter.
```

>    A graph appears. Note, it may start you in the The Prometheus query builder, if this is the case, select the `Code` toggle in the top right of the query window, just below the `Run Query` button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A graph appears. 
```

>    A graph appears. Note, it may start you in the The Prometheus query builder, if this is the case, select the `Code` toggle in the top right of the query window, just below the `Run Query` button.
>    <img width="167" alt="image" src="https://github.com/glitchwizard/grafana/assets/40527412/f5247425-ab0b-4e78-a608-feb11c3b4b8e">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A graph appears. 
```

1. Go back to the [sample application](http://localhost:8081) and generate some traffic by adding new links, voting, or just refresh the browser.

1. Back in Grafana, in the upper-right corner, click the _time picker_, and select **Last 5 minutes**. By zooming in on the last few minutes, it's easier to see when you receive new data.

Depending on your use case, you might want to group on other labels. Try grouping by other labels, such as `status_code`, by changing the `by(route)` part of the query.

## Add a logging data source

Grafana supports log data sources, like [Loki](/oss/loki/). Just like for metrics, you first need to add your data source to Grafana.

> 1. In the sidebar, click **Connections** and then **Data sources**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the menu icon and, in the sidebar, click **Connections** and then **Data sources**.
```

> 1. In the sidebar, hover over the **Administration** (gear) icon, and then click **Data Sources**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the sidebar, click **Connections** and then **Data sources**.
```

Author: So just out of curiosity, what's the difference between a data source and a connection? And is there anything different between setting it up using the Admin way, or the Connections way?

Reviewer: > So just out of curiosity, what's the difference between a data source and a connection? And is there anything different between setting it up using the Admin way, or the Connections way?

A data source is just a type of connection. In the Cloud version of Grafana, this functionality has been removed from Admin and only exists under Connections. I suspect this will happen in the on-prem version as well, so future-proofing here.

Every panel consists of a _query_ and a _visualization_. The query defines _what_ data you want to display, whereas the visualization defines _how_ the data is displayed.

> 1. In the sidebar, click **Dashboards**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the menu icon and, in the sidebar, click **Dashboards**.
```

1. On the **Dashboards** page, click **New** in top right corner and select **New Dashboard** in the drop-down.
1. Click **+ Add visualization**.
1. In the modal that opens, select the Prometheus data source that you just added.
1. In the **Query** tab below the graph, enter the query from earlier and then press Shift + Enter:

   ```
   sum(rate(tns_request_duration_seconds_count[5m])) by(route)
   ```

1. Click **Options** under the query field to open the panel.

> 1. In the **Legend** field, select Custom and then enter `route` to rename the series in the legend. The graph legend updates when you click outside the field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Legend** field, select **Custom** and then enter `route` to rename the series in the legend. The graph legend updates when you click outside the field.
```

Every panel consists of a _query_ and a _visualization_. The query defines _what_ data you want to display, whereas the visualization defines _how_ the data is displayed.

> 1. Open the sidebar, then click **Dashboards**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the sidebar and then click **Dashboards**.
```

> 1. Open the sidebar, then click **Dashboards**.
> 1. Click the **New** button on the right hand side.
> 1. From the dropdown that appears, click **New Dashboard**
> 1. This opens up an empty dashboard, click the **+ Add visualization** button
> 1. Select Prometheus as the data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the sidebar, click **Dashboards**.
1. On the **Dashboards** page, click **New** in top right corner and select **New Dashboard** in the drop-down.
1. Click **+ Add visualization**.
1. In the modal that opens, select the Prometheus data source that you just added.
```

1. In the **Query** tab below the graph, enter the query from earlier and then press Shift + Enter:

   ```
   sum(rate(tns_request_duration_seconds_count[5m])) by(route)
   ```

> 1. In the panel editor on the right, under **Panel options**, change the panel title to "Traffic".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click **Options** under the query field to open the panel.
1. In the **Legend** field, select Custom and then enter `route` to rename the series in the legend. The graph legend updates when you click outside the field.
1. In the panel editor on the right, under **Panel options**, change the panel title to "Traffic".
```

<!--this add button is gone rn. look into this -->

> 1. Click **Apply**. Grafana displays the Annotations list, with your new annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click **Apply**. Grafana displays the **Annotations** page, with your new annotation in the list.
```

> 1. Click the **Go back** arrow to return to your dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the name of the dashboard in the breadcrumb at the top of the screen to return to your dashboard.
```

> 1. At the top of your dashboard, there is now a toggle with the name **Errors** to display the results of the newly created annotation query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. At the top of your dashboard, there is now a toggle with the name **Errors** to display the results of the newly created annotation query. The toggle is enabled by default.
```

> 1. At the top of your dashboard, there is now a toggle with the name **Errors** to display the results of the newly created annotation query. Press it so that it's enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. At the top of your dashboard, there is now a toggle with the name **Errors** to display the results of the newly created annotation query. 
```

Next, let's configure a Contact Point in Grafana's Alerting UI to send notifications to our Request Bin.

> 1. Return to Grafana. In Grafana's sidebar, click **Alerting** and then **Contact points**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Return to Grafana. Click the menu icon and, in the sidebar, click **Alerting** and then **Contact points**.
```

> 1. Return to Grafana. In Grafana's sidebar, expand the **Alerting** (bell) list and then click **Contact points**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Return to Grafana. In Grafana's sidebar, click **Alerting** and then **Contact points**.
```

Now that Grafana knows how to notify us, it's time to set up an alert rule:

> 1. In Grafana's sidebar, expand the **Alerting** list (bell icon) and then click **Alert rules**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In Grafana's sidebar, click **Alerting** and then **Alert rules**.
```

1. Click the **Create alert rule** button.

> 1. For **Section 1**, name the rule `fundamentals-test`, and set **Rule type** to **Grafana Managed Alert**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. For **Section 1**, name the rule `fundamentals-test`.
```

> 1. For **Section 2**, find the **query A** box. Choose your Prometheus datasource and enter the same query that we used in our earlier panel: `sum(rate(tns_request_duration_seconds_count[5m])) by(route)`. Press **Run queries**. You should see some data in the graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. For **Section 2**, set **Rule type** to **Grafana Managed Alert**. Next, find the **query A** box. Choose your Prometheus datasource and enter the same query that we used in our earlier panel: `sum(rate(tns_request_duration_seconds_count[5m])) by(route)`. Press **Run queries**. You should see some data in the graph.
```

> 1. In Grafana's sidebar, click **Alerting** and then **Alert rules**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the sidebar, click **Alert rules**.
```

> 1. Click the **Create alert rule** button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click **Create alert rule**.
```

> 1. Now scroll down to the **query B** box. For **Operation** choose `Classic condition`. [You can read more about classic and multi-dimensional conditions here](/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/unified-alerting/alerting-rules/create-grafana-managed-rule/#single-and-multi-dimensional-rule). For conditions enter the following: `WHEN last() OF A IS ABOVE 0.2`. **query C** should be deleted to make this work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Now scroll down to the query box **B**. For the operation, change it from **Reduce** to **Classic condition**. [You can read more about classic and multi-dimensional conditions here](/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/unified-alerting/alerting-rules/create-grafana-managed-rule/#single-and-multi-dimensional-rule). For conditions enter the following: `WHEN last() OF A IS ABOVE 0.2`. Delete query **C**.
```

> 1. In **Section 3**, Select **+ Add New** under **Folder** dropdown menu. Name the new folder `fundamentals` and press enter. This will create the folder needed. In **Evaluation Group** name it also `fundamentals` for now. In the **for** field, enter `0m`. This setting makes Grafana wait until an alert has fired for a given time before Grafana sends the notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In section **3**, Select **+ Add New** in **Folder** dropdown menu. Name the new folder `fundamentals` and press enter. This will create the folder needed. In **Evaluation Group**, name the group also `fundamentals` for now. In the **for** field, enter `0m`. This setting makes Grafana wait until an alert has fired for a given time before Grafana sends the notification.
```

> 1. In **Section 4**, you can add some sample text to your summary message. [Read more about message templating here](/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/unified-alerting/message-templating/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In section **4**, you can add some sample text to your summary message. [Read more about message templating here](/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/unified-alerting/message-templating/).
```

> 1. Click **Save rule and exit** at the top of the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the top right corner of the page, click **Save rule and exit**.
```

> 1. Expand Grafana's sidebar, expand the **Alerting** (bell icon) node and then click **Notification policies**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the sidebar, click **Notification policies**.
```

Reviewer: > Shouldn't we make it more clear where the 'Notification Policies' is located? Assuming the **Alerting** node is expanded isn't quite so clear. Just in case someone opens the sidebar and doesn't have it expanded for some reason.

I was walking my way through the tutorial as I made edits, so at this particular point in the steps, the sidebar should still be open (not the case all the time during the tutorial). Also, at this point, we'll have users 3 or 4 times to click the menu icon to open the sidebar, so if they have managed to close it, they've learned that behaviour by now.

> 1. Under **Default policy**, select **...** &rsaquo; **Edit** and change the **Default contact point** to **RequestBin**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Under **Default policy**, click the button with the three dots and select **Edit**. Change the **Default contact point** to **RequestBin**. Click **Update default policy**.
```
